Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TCCC)
Guidelines
25 January 2024
RED text indicates new text in this year’s update to the TCCC Guidelines; BLUE
text indicates text that did not change but was relocated within the guidelines.
Recent changes include airway management and traumatic brain injury
management in tactical field care.
Basic Management Plan for Care Under Fire/Threat
1. Return fire and take cover.
2. Direct or expect casualty to remain engaged as a combatant if appropriate.
3. Direct casualty to move to cover and apply self-aid if able or when tactically feasible, move
or drag casualty to cover.
4. Try to keep the casualty from sustaining additional wounds.
5. Casualties should be extracted from burning vehicles or buildings and moved to places of
relative safety. Do what is necessary to stop the burning process.
6. Stop life-threatening external hemorrhage if tactically feasible:
a. Direct casualty to control hemorrhage by self-aid if able.
b. Use a CoTCCC-recommended limb tourniquet for hemorrhage that is anatomically
amenable to tourniquet use.
c. Apply the limb tourniquet over the uniform clearly proximal to the bleeding site(s). If
the site of the life-threatening bleeding is not readily apparent, place the tourniquet
“high and tight” (as proximal as possible) on the injured limb and move the casualty
to cover.
7. Airway management is generally best deferred until the Tactical Field Care phase.
1\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
Basic Management Plan for Tactical Field Care
1. Establish a security perimeter in accordance with unit tactical standard operating
procedures and/or battle drills. Maintain tactical situational awareness.
2. Triage casualties as required. Casualties with an altered mental status should have
weapons and communications equipment taken away immediately.
3. Massive Hemorrhage
a. Assess for unrecognized hemorrhage and control all sources of bleeding. If not
already done, use a CoTCCC-recommended limb tourniquet to control life-
threatening external hemorrhage that is anatomically amenable to tourniquet use or
for any traumatic amputation. Apply directly to the skin 2-3 inches above the
bleeding site. If bleeding is not controlled with the first tourniquet, apply a second
tourniquet side-by-side with the first.
b. For compressible (external) hemorrhage not amenable to limb tourniquet use or as an
adjunct to tourniquet removal, use Combat Gauze as the CoTCCC hemostatic
dressing of choice.
1. Alternative hemostatic adjuncts:
 Celox Gauze or
 ChitoGauze or
 XStat (best for deep, narrow-tract junctional wounds)
 iTClamp (may be used alone or in conjunction with hemostatic
dressing or XStat)
• Hemostatic dressings should be applied with at least 3 minutes of direct
pressure (optional for XStat). Each dressing works differently, so if one fails
to control bleeding, it may be removed and a fresh dressing of the same type
or a different type applied. (Note: XStat is not to be removed in the field, but
additional XStat, other hemostatic adjuncts, or trauma dressings may be
applied over it.)
• If the bleeding site is amenable to use of a junctional tourniquet, immediately
apply a junctional tourniquet. Do not delay in the application of the junctional
tourniquet once it is ready for use. Apply hemostatic dressings with direct
pressure if a junctional tourniquet is not available or while the junctional
tourniquet is being readied for use.
c. For external hemorrhage of the head and neck where the wound edges can be easily
re-approximated, the iTClamp may be used as a primary option for hemorrhage
control. Wounds should be packed with a hemostatic dressing or XStat, if
appropriate, prior to iTClamp application.
1. The iTClamp does not require additional direct pressure, either when used
alone or in combination with other hemostatic adjuncts.
2. If the iTClamp is applied to the neck, perform frequent airway monitoring
and evaluate for an expanding hematoma that may compromise the airway.\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
Consider placing a definitive airway if there is evidence of an expanding
hematoma.
3. DO NOT APPLY on or near the eye or eyelid (within 1cm of the orbit).
d. Perform initial assessment for hemorrhagic shock (altered mental status in the
absence of brain injury and/or weak or absent radial pulse) and consider immediate
initiation of shock resuscitation efforts.
4. Airway Management
a. Assess for unobstructed airway.
b. If there is a traumatic airway obstruction or impending traumatic obstruction, prepare
for possible direct airway intervention.
c. Allow a conscious casualty to assume any position that best protects the airway, to
include sitting up and/or leaning forward.
d. Place unconscious casualty in the recovery position, head tilted back; chin away from
chest.
e. Use suction if available and appropriate.
f. If the previous measures are unsuccessful, and the casualty’s airway obstruction (e.g.
facial fractures, direct airway injury, blood, deformation or burns) is unmanageable,
perform a surgical cricothyroidotomy using one of the following:
1. Bougie-aided open surgical technique using a flanged and cuffed airway
cannula of less than 10 mm outer diameter, 6-7 mm internal diameter, and 5-
8 cm of intratracheal length.
2. Standard open surgical technique using a flanged and cuffed airway cannula
of less than 10mm outer diameter, 6-7 mm internal diameter, and 5-8 cm of
intra-tracheal length.
3. Verify placement with continuous EtCO2 capnography.
4. Use lidocaine if the casualty is conscious.
g. Frequently reassess SpO2, EtCO2, and airway patency as airway status may change
over time.
h. Cervical spine stabilization is not necessary for casualties who have sustained only
penetrating trauma.
5. Respiration/Breathing
a. Assess for tension pneumothorax and treat, as necessary.
1. Suspect a tension pneumothorax and treat when a casualty has significant
torso trauma or primary blast injury and one or more of the following:
− Severe or progressive respiratory distress
− Severe or progressive tachypnea
− Absent or markedly decreased breath sounds on one side of the chest
− Hemoglobin oxygen saturation < 90% on pulse oximetry
− Shock
− Traumatic cardiac arrest without obviously fatal wounds\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
 If not treated promptly, tension pneumothorax may progress from
respiratory distress to shock and traumatic cardiac arrest.
2. Initial treatment of suspected tension pneumothorax:
− If the casualty has a chest seal in place, burp or remove the chest seal.
− Establish pulse oximetry monitoring.
− Place the casualty in the supine or recovery position unless he or she is
conscious and needs to sit up to help keep the airway clear as a result
of maxillofacial trauma.
− Decompress the chest on the side of the injury with a 14-gauge or a
10-gauge, 3.25-inch needle/catheter unit.
 Either the 5th intercostal space (ICS) in the anterior axillary line
(AAL) or the 2nd ICS in the mid-clavicular line (MCL) may be
used for needle decompression (NDC). If the anterior (MCL)
site is used, do not insert the needle medial to the nipple line.
 The needle/catheter unit should be inserted at an angle
perpendicular to the chest wall and just over the top of the
lower rib at the insertion site. Insert the needle/catheter unit all
the way to the hub and hold it in place for 5-10 seconds to
allow decompression to occur.
 After the NDC has been performed, remove the needle and
leave the catheter in place.
− If a casualty has significant torso trauma or primary blast injury and is
in traumatic cardiac arrest (no pulse, no respirations, no response to
painful stimuli, no other signs of life), decompress both sides of the
chest before discontinuing treatment.
3. The NDC should be considered successful if:
− Respiratory distress improves, or
− There is an obvious hissing sound as air escapes from the chest when
NDC is performed (this may be difficult to appreciate in high-noise
environments), or
− Hemoglobin oxygen saturation increases to 90% or greater (note that
this may take several minutes and may not happen at altitude), or
− A casualty with no vital signs has return of consciousness and/or radial
pulse.
4. If the initial NDC fails to improve the casualty’s signs/symptoms from the
suspected tension pneumothorax:
− Perform a second NDC on the same side of the chest at whichever of
the two recommended sites was not previously used. Use a new
needle/catheter unit for the second attempt.
− Consider, based on the mechanism of injury and physical findings
whether decompression of the opposite side of the chest may be
needed.
− Continue to re-assess!
5. If the initial NDC was successful, but symptoms later recur:\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
− Perform another NDC at the same site that was used previously. Use a
new needle/catheter unit for the repeat NDC
− Continue to re-assess!
6. If the second NDC is also not successful: continue on to the Circulation
section of the TCCC Guidelines.
b. All open and/or sucking chest wounds should be treated by immediately applying a
vented chest seal to cover the defect. If a vented chest seal is not available, use a non-
vented chest seal. Monitor the casualty for the potential development of a subsequent
tension pneumothorax. If the casualty develops increasing hypoxia, respiratory
distress, or hypotension and a tension pneumothorax is suspected, treat by burping or
removing the dressing or by needle decompression.
c. Initiate pulse oximetry. All individuals with moderate/severe TBI should be
monitored with pulse oximetry. Readings may be misleading in the settings of shock
or marked hypothermia.
d. Casualties with moderate/severe TBI should be given supplemental oxygen when
available to maintain an oxygen saturation > 90%.
e. If the casualty has impaired ventilation and uncorrectable hypoxia with decreasing
oxygen saturation below 90%, consider insertion of a properly sized Nasopharyngeal
Airway, and ventilate using a 1000ml resuscitator Bag-Valve-Mask.
f. Use continuous EtCO2 and SpO2 monitoring to help assess airway patency.
6. Circulation
a. Bleeding
1. A pelvic binder should be applied for cases of suspected pelvic fracture:
− Severe blunt force or blast injury with one or more of the following
indications:
 Pelvic pain
 Any major lower limb amputation or near amputation
 Physical exam findings suggestive of a pelvic fracture
 Unconsciousness
 Shock
2. Reassess prior tourniquet application. Expose the wound and determine if a
tourniquet is needed. If it is needed, replace any limb tourniquet placed over
the uniform with one applied directly to the skin 2-3 inches above the
bleeding site. Ensure that bleeding is stopped. If there is no traumatic
amputation, a distal pulse should be checked. If bleeding persists or a distal
pulse is still present, consider additional tightening of the tourniquet or the
use of a second tourniquet side-by-side with the first to eliminate both
bleeding and the distal pulse. If the reassessment determines that the prior
tourniquet was not needed, then remove the tourniquet and note time of
removal on the TCCC Casualty Card.
3. Limb tourniquets and junctional tourniquets should be converted to
hemostatic or pressure dressings as soon as possible if three criteria are met:
the casualty is not in shock; it is possible to monitor the wound closely for\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
bleeding; and the tourniquet is not being used to control bleeding from an
amputated extremity. Every effort should be made to convert tourniquets in
less than 2 hours if bleeding can be controlled with other means. Do not
remove a tourniquet that has been in place more than 6 hours unless close
monitoring and lab capability are available.
4. Expose and clearly mark all tourniquets with the time of tourniquet
application. Note tourniquets applied and time of application; time of re-
application; time of conversion; and time of removal on the TCCC Casualty
Card. Use a permanent marker to mark on the tourniquet and the casualty
card.
b. Assess for hemorrhagic shock (altered mental status in the absence of brain injury
and/or weak or absent radial pulse).
c. IV/IO Access
1. Intravenous (IV) or intraosseous (IO) access is indicated if the casualty is in
hemorrhagic shock or at significant risk of shock (and may therefore need
fluid resuscitation), or if the casualty needs medications, but cannot take
them by mouth.
− An 18-gauge IV or saline lock is preferred.
− If vascular access is needed but not quickly obtainable via the IV
route, use the IO route.
d. Tranexamic Acid (TXA)
1. If a casualty will likely need a blood transfusion (for example: presents with
hemorrhagic shock, one or more major amputations, penetrating torso
trauma, or evidence of severe bleeding)
OR
2. If the casualty has signs or symptoms of significant TBI or has altered
mental status associated with blast injury or blunt trauma:
− Administer 2 gm of tranexamic acid via slow IV or IO push as soon as
possible but NOT later than 3 hours after injury.
e. Fluid Resuscitation
1. Assess for hemorrhagic shock (altered mental status in the absence of brain
injury and/or weak or absent radial pulse).
2. The resuscitation fluids of choice for casualties in hemorrhagic shock, listed
from most to least preferred, are:
(1) Cold stored low titer O whole blood
(2) Pre-screened low titer O fresh whole blood
(3) Plasma, red blood cells (RBCs) and platelets in a 1:1:1 ratio
(4) Plasma and RBCs in a 1:1 ratio
(5) Plasma or RBCs alone
 NOTE: Hypothermia prevention measures [Section 7] should be
initiated while fluid resuscitation is being accomplished.\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
3. If not in shock:
− No IV fluids are immediately necessary.
− Fluids by mouth are permissible if the casualty is conscious and can
swallow.
4. If in shock and blood products are available under an approved command or
theater blood product administration protocol:
− Resuscitate with cold stored low titer O whole blood, or, if not
available
− Pre-screened low titer O fresh whole blood, or, if not available
− Plasma, RBCs, and platelets in a 1:1:1 ratio, or, if not available
− Plasma and RBCs in a 1:1 ratio, or, if not available
− Reconstituted dried plasma, liquid plasma or thawed plasma alone or
RBCs alone
− Reassess the casualty after each unit. Continue resuscitation until a
palpable radial pulse, improved mental status or systolic BP of 100
mmHg is present.
− Discontinue fluid administration when one or more of the above end
points has been achieved.
− If blood products are transfused, administer one gram of calcium (30
ml of 10% calcium gluconate or 10 ml of 10% calcium chloride) IV/IO
after the first transfused product.
5. Given increased risk for a potentially lethal hemolytic reaction, transfusion
of unscreened group O fresh whole blood or type specific fresh whole blood
should only be performed under appropriate medical direction by trained
personnel.
6. Transfusion should occur as soon as possible after life-threatening
hemorrhage in order to keep the casualty alive. If Rh negative blood
products are not immediately available, Rh positive blood products should
be used in hemorrhagic shock.
7. If a casualty with an altered mental status due to suspected TBI has a weak
or absent radial pulse, resuscitate as necessary to restore and maintain a
normal radial pulse. If BP monitoring is available, maintain a target systolic
BP between 100-110 mmHg.
8. Reassess the casualty frequently to check for recurrence of shock. If shock
recurs, re-check all external hemorrhage control measures to ensure that
they are still effective and repeat the fluid resuscitation as outlined above.
f. Refractory Shock
1. If a casualty in shock is not responding to fluid resuscitation, consider
untreated tension pneumothorax as a possible cause of refractory shock.
Thoracic trauma, persistent respiratory distress, absent breath sounds, and
hemoglobin oxygen saturation < 90% support this diagnosis. Treat as
indicated with repeated NDC or finger thoracostomy/chest tube insertion at\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
the 5th ICS in the AAL, according to the skills, experience, and
authorizations of the treating medical provider. Note that if finger
thoracostomy is used, it may not remain patent and finger decompression
through the incision may have to be repeated. Consider decompressing the
opposite side of the chest if indicated based on the mechanism of injury and
physical findings.
7. Hypothermia Prevention
a. Take early and aggressive steps to prevent further body heat loss and add external
heat, when possible, for both trauma and severely burned casualties.
b. Minimize casualty’s exposure to cold ground, wind and air temperatures. Place
insulation material between the casualty and any cold surface as soon as possible.
Keep protective gear on or with the casualty if feasible.
c. Replace wet clothing with dry clothing, if possible, and protect from further heat loss.
d. Place an active heating blanket on the casualty’s anterior torso and under the arms in
the axillae (to prevent burns, do not place any active heating source directly on the
skin or wrap around the torso).
e. Enclose the casualty with the exterior impermeable enclosure bag.
f. As soon as possible, upgrade hypothermia enclosure system to a well-insulated
enclosure system using a hooded sleeping bag or other readily available insulation
inside the enclosure bag/external vapor barrier shell.
g. Pre-stage an insulated hypothermia enclosure system with external active heating for
transition from the non-insulated hypothermia enclosure systems; seek to improve
upon existing enclosure system when possible.
h. Use a battery-powered warming device to deliver IV/IO resuscitation fluids, in
accordance with current CoTCCC guidelines, at flow rate up to 150 ml/min with a
38°C output temperature.
i. Protect the casualty from exposure to wind and precipitation on any evacuation
platform.
8. Moderate or Severe Traumatic Brain Injury (unable to follow commands with either
evidence of head trauma or a blunt/blast mechanism)
a. Prevent hypoxemia (goal SpO2 >90-95%)
1. If basic airway maneuvers fail to maintain SpO2 >90% or are not tactically
feasible, ensure low oxygen saturations are not due to tension pneumothorax
or hemorrhage.
2. Consider definitive airway if unable to maintain SpO2 >90%.
b. Prevent hypotension – maintain SBP 100-110 mmHg. Transfuse whole blood or
plasma preferentially if casualty is in hemorrhagic shock. Otherwise use 1-2 L bolus
of crystalloid if no evidence of hemorrhage or hemorrhagic shock.
c. Identify and treat herniation (declining neurologic status with asymmetric or
fixed/dilated pupil(s), or posturing):
1. Interventions for signs of impending herniation should only be employed for
up to 20 minutes, and if en route to surgical decompression.\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
− Administer 250ml or 3% or 5% OR 30ml of 23.4% hypertonic saline
SLOW IV/IO push over 10 minutes followed by a saline flush. Repeat
in 20 minutes if no response (max 2 doses).
− Monitor IV/IO site and discontinue if signs of extravasation.
− Elevate head 30 degrees if casualty not in shock and tactically feasible.
− Loosen cervical collar if present and keep head facing forward.
− Hyperventilate using continuous capnography (goal EtCO2 32-38
mmHg).
9. Penetrating Eye Trauma
• If a penetrating eye injury is noted or suspected:
− Perform a rapid field test of visual acuity and document findings.
− Cover the eye with a rigid eye shield (NOT a pressure patch).
− Ensure that the 400 mg moxifloxacin tablet in the Combat Wound
Medication Pack (CWMP) is taken if possible and that IV/IO/IM
antibiotics are given as outlined below if oral moxifloxacin cannot be
taken.
10. Monitoring
1. Initiate advanced electronic monitoring if indicated and if monitoring
equipment is available.
11. Analgesia
a. TCCC non-medical first responders should provide analgesia on the battlefield
achieved by using:
1. Mild to Moderate Pain
2. Casualty is still able to fight
− TCCC Combat Wound Medication Pack (CWMP)
 Acetaminophen – 500 mg tablet, 2 PO every 8 hours
 Meloxicam – 15 mg PO once a day
b. TCCC Medical Personnel:
Option 1
1. Mild to Moderate Pain
2. Casualty is still able to fight
− TCCC Combat Wound Medication Pack (CWMP)
 Acetaminophen – 500 mg tablet, 2 PO every 8 hours
 Meloxicam – 15 mg PO once a day
Option 2
3. Mild to Moderate Pain
4. Casualty IS NOT in shock or respiratory distress AND Casualty IS NOT at
significant risk of developing either condition.
− Oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate (OTFC) 800 μg\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
 May repeat once more after 15 minutes if pain uncontrolled by
first
TCCC Combat Paramedics or Providers:
− Fentanyl 50 mcg IV/IO 0.5-1 mcg/kg
 May repeat q 30 min
− Fentanyl 100 mcg IN
 May repeat q 30 min
Option 3
5. Moderate to Severe Pain
6. Casualty IS in hemorrhagic shock or respiratory distress OR
7. Casualty IS at significant risk of developing either condition:
− Ketamine 20-30 mg (or 0.2 - 0.3 mg/kg) slow IV or IO push
 Repeat doses q 20min prn for IV or IO
 End points: Control of pain or development of nystagmus
(rhythmic back-and-forth movement of the eyes).
− Ketamine 50-100 mg (or 0.5-1 mg/kg) IM or IN
 Repeat doses q20-30 min prn for IM or IN
Option 4
TCCC Combat Paramedics or Providers:
• Sedation required: significant severe injuries requiring dissociation for
casualty safety or mission success or when a casualty requires an invasive
procedure; must be prepared to secure the airway:
− Ketamine 1-2 mg/kg slow IV/IO push initial dose
 Endpoints: procedural (dissociative) anesthesia
− Ketamine 300 mg IM (or 2-3 mg/kg IM) initial dose
 Endpoints: procedural (dissociative) anesthesia
 If an emergence phenomenon occurs, consider giving 0.5-2 mg IV/IO
midazolam.
 If continued dissociation is required, move to the Prolonged Casualty
Care (PCC) analgesia and sedation guidelines.
• If longer duration analgesia is required:
− Ketamine slow IV/IO infusion 0.3 mg/kg in 100 ml 0.9% sodium
chloride over 5-15 minutes.
 Repeat doses q45min prn for IV or IO
 End points: Control of pain or development of nystagmus
(rhythmic back-and-forth movement of the eyes).\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
c. Analgesia and sedation notes:
1. Casualties need to be disarmed after being given OTFC, IV/IO fentanyl,
ketamine, or midazolam.
2. The goal of analgesia is to reduce pain to a tolerable level while still
protecting their airway and mentation.
3. The goal of sedation is to stop awareness of painful procedures.
4. Document a mental status exam using the AVPU method prior to
administering opioids or ketamine.
5. For all casualties given opioids, ketamine or benzodiazepines – monitor
airway, breathing, and circulation closely.
6. Directions for administering OTFC:
− Place lozenge between the cheek and the gum.
− Do not chew the lozenge.
− Recommend taping lozenge-on-a-stick to casualty’s finger as an added
safety measure OR utilizing a safety pin and rubber band to attach the
lozenge (under tension) to the casualty’s uniform or plate carrier.
− Reassess in 15 minutes.
− Add second lozenge, in other cheek, as necessary to control severe
pain.
− Monitor for respiratory depression.
7. Ketamine comes in different concentrations; the higher concentration
option (100 mg/ml) is recommended when using IN dosing route to
minimize the volume administered intranasally.
8. Naloxone (0.4 mg IV/IO/IM/IN) should be available when using opioid
analgesics.
9. TBI and/or eye injury does not preclude the use of ketamine. However, use
caution with OTFC, IV/IO fentanyl, ketamine, or midazolam in TBI
casualties as this may make it difficult to perform a neurologic exam or
determine if the casualty is decompensating.
10. Ketamine may be a useful adjunct to reduce the amount of opioids required
to provide effective pain relief. It is safe to give ketamine to a casualty who
has previously received a narcotic. IV Ketamine should be given over 1
minute.
11. If respirations are reduced after using opioids or ketamine, reposition the
casualty into a “sniffing position”. If that fails, provide ventilatory support
with a bag-valve-mask or mouth-to-mask ventilations.
12. Ondansetron, 4 mg Orally Dissolving Tablet (ODT)/IV/IO/IM, every 8
hours as needed for nausea or vomiting. Each 8-hour dose can be repeated
once after 15 minutes if nausea and vomiting are not improved. Do not give
more than 8 mg in any 8-hour interval. Oral ondansetron is NOT an
acceptable alternative to the ODT formulation.
13. The use routine of benzodiazepines such as midazolam is NOT
recommended for analgesia. When performing procedural sedation,
benzodiazepines may also be considered to treat behavioral disturbances or
unpleasant (emergence) reactions. Benzodiazepines should not be used\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
prophylactically and are not commonly needed when the correct pain or
sedation dose of ketamine is used.
14. Polypharmacy is not recommended; benzodiazepines should NOT be used
in conjunction with opioid analgesia.
15. If a casualty appears to be partially dissociated, it is safer to administer
more ketamine than to use a benzodiazepine.
12. Antibiotics
a. Antibiotics recommended for all open combat wounds.
b. If able to take PO meds:
1. Moxifloxacin (from the CWMP), 400 mg PO once a day.
c. If unable to take PO meds (shock, unconsciousness):
1. Ertapenem, 1 gm IV/IO/IM once a day.
13. Inspect and dress known wounds.
a. Inspect and dress known wounds.
b. Abdominal evisceration – Control bleeding; rinse with clean (and warm if possible)
fluid to reduce gross contamination. Hemorrhage control – apply combat gauze or
CoTCCC recommended hemostatic dressing to uncontrolled bleeding. Cover exposed
bowel with a moist, sterile dressing or sterile water-impermeable covering.
1. Reduction: do not attempt if there is evidence of ruptured bowel
(gastric/intestinal fluid or stool leakage) or active bleeding.
2. If no evidence of bowel leakage and hemorrhage is visibly controlled, a
single brief attempt (<60 seconds) may be made to replace/reduce the
eviscerated abdominal contents.
3. If unable to reduce; cover the eviscerated organs with water impermeable
non-adhesive material (transparent preferred to allow ability to re-assess for
ongoing bleeding); examples include a bowel bag, IV bag, clear food wrap,
etc. and secure the impermeable dressing to the casualty using adhesive
dressing (examples: ioban, chest seal).
4. Do NOT FORCE contents back into abdomen or actively bleeding viscera.
5. The casualty should remain NPO.
14. Check for additional wounds.
15. Burns.
a. Assess and treat as a trauma casualty with burns and not burn casualty with injuries.
b. Facial burns, especially those that occur in closed spaces, may be associated with
inhalation injury. Aggressively monitor airway status and oxygen saturation in such
casualties and consider early surgical airway for respiratory distress or oxygen
desaturation.
c. Estimate total body surface area (TBSA) burned to the nearest 10% using the Rule of
Nines.\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
d. Cover the burn area with dry, sterile dressings. For extensive burns (>20%), consider
placing the casualty in the Heat-Reflective Shell or Blizzard Survival Blanket from
the Hypothermia Prevention Kit in order to both cover the burned areas and prevent
hypothermia.
e. Fluid resuscitation (USAISR Rule of Ten):
1. If burns are greater than 20% of TBSA, fluid resuscitation should be
initiated as soon as IV/IO access is established. Resuscitation should be
initiated with Lactated Ringer’s, normal saline, or Hextend. If Hextend is
used, no more than 1000 ml should be given, followed by Lactated Ringer’s
or normal saline as needed.
2. Initial IV/IO fluid rate is calculated as %TBSA x 10 ml/hr for adults
weighing 40- 80 kg.
3. For every 10 kg ABOVE 80 kg, increase initial rate by 100 ml/hr.
4. If hemorrhagic shock is also present, resuscitation for hemorrhagic shock
takes precedence over resuscitation for burn shock. Administer IV/IO fluids
per the TCCC Guidelines in Section (6).
5. Consider oral fluids for burns up to 30% TBSA if casualty is conscious and
able to swallow.
f. Analgesia in accordance with the TCCC Guidelines in Section (10) may be
administered to treat burn pain.
g. Prehospital antibiotic therapy is not indicated solely for burns, but antibiotics should
be given per the TCCC guidelines in Section (11) if indicated to prevent infection in
penetrating wounds.
h. All TCCC interventions can be performed on or through burned skin in a burn
casualty.
i. Burn casualties are particularly susceptible to hypothermia. Extra emphasis should be
placed on barrier heat loss prevention methods.
16. Splint fractures and re-check pulses.
17. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
a. Resuscitation on the battlefield for victims of blast or penetrating trauma who have no
pulse, no ventilations, and no other signs of life will not be successful and should not
be attempted.
b. However, casualties with torso trauma or polytrauma who have no pulse or
respirations during TFC should have bilateral needle decompression performed to
ensure they do not have a tension pneumothorax prior to discontinuation of care. The
procedure is the same as described in section (5a) above.
18. Communication.
a. Communicate with the casualty if possible. Encourage, reassure and explain care.
b. Communicate with tactical leadership as soon as possible and throughout casualty
treatment as needed. Provide leadership with casualty status and evacuation
requirements to assist with coordination of evacuation assets.\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
c. Communicate with the evacuation system (the Patient Evacuation Coordination Cell)
to arrange for TACEVAC. Communicate with medical providers on the evacuation
asset if possible and relay mechanism of injury, injuries sustained, signs/symptoms,
and treatments rendered. Provide additional information as appropriate.
19. Documentation of Care.
a. Document clinical assessments, treatments rendered, and changes in the casualty’s
status on a TCCC Card (DD Form 1380).
b. Forward documentation with the casualty to the next level of care.
20. Prepare for Evacuation.
a. Complete and secure the TCCC Card (DD 1380) to the casualty.
b. Secure all loose ends of bandages and wraps.
c. Secure hypothermia prevention wraps/blankets/straps.
d. Secure litter straps as required. Consider additional padding for long evacuations.
e. Provide instructions to ambulatory casualties as needed.
f. Stage casualties for evacuation in accordance with unit standard operating
procedures.
g. Maintain security at the evacuation point in accordance with unit standard operating
procedures.\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
Principles of Tactical Evacuation Care (TACEVAC)
* The term “Tactical Evacuation” includes both Casualty Evacuation (CASEVAC) and Medical Evacuation
(MEDEVAC) as defined in Joint Publication 4-02.
Basic Management Plan for Tactical Evacuation Care
1. Transition of Care
a. Tactical force personnel should establish evacuation point security and stage
casualties for evacuation.
b. Tactical force personnel or the medic should communicate casualty information and
status to TACEVAC personnel as clearly as possible. The minimum information
communicated should include stable or unstable, injuries identified, and treatments
rendered.
c. TACEVAC personnel should stage casualties on evacuation platforms as required.
d. Secure casualties in the evacuation platform in accordance with unit policies,
platform configurations and safety requirements.
e. TACEVAC medical personnel should re-assess casualties and re-evaluate all injuries
and previous interventions.
2. Massive Hemorrhage (same as Tactical Field Care)
3. Airway Management
Endotracheal intubation may be considered in lieu of cricothyroidotomy if trained.
4. Respiration/Breathing
Most combat casualties do not require supplemental oxygen, but administration of
oxygen may be of benefit for the following types of casualties:
• Low oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry
• Injuries associated with impaired oxygenation
• Unconscious casualty
• Casualty with TBI (maintain oxygen saturation > 90%)
• Casualty in shock
• Casualty at altitude
• Known or suspected smoke inhalation
5. Circulation (same as Tactical Field Care)\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
6. Moderate or Severe Traumatic Brain Injury (same as Tactical Field Care)
7. Hypothermia Prevention (same as Tactical Field Care)
8. Penetrating Eye Trauma (same as Tactical Field Care)
9. Monitoring (same as Tactical Field Care)
10. Analgesia (same as Tactical Field Care)
11. Antibiotics (same as Tactical Field Care)
12. Inspect and dress known wounds (same as Tactical Field Care)
13. Check for additional wounds. (same as Tactical Field Care)
14. Burns (same as Tactical Field Care)
15. Splint fractures and re-check pulses (same as Tactical Field Care)
16. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) in TACEVAC
a. Casualties with torso trauma or polytrauma who have no pulse or respirations during
TACEVAC should have bilateral needle decompression performed to ensure they do
not have a tension pneumothorax. The procedure is the same as described in Section
(4a) above.
b. CPR may be attempted during this phase of care if the casualty does not have
obviously fatal wounds and will be arriving at a facility with a surgical capability
within a short period of time. CPR should not be done at the expense of
compromising the mission or denying lifesaving care to other casualties.
17. Communication
a. Communicate with the casualty if possible. Encourage, reassure and explain care.
b. Communicate with medical providers at the next level of care as feasible and relay
mechanism of injury, injuries sustained, signs/symptoms, and treatments rendered.
Provide additional information as appropriate.
18. Documentation of Care (same as Tactical Field Care)\nTCCC Guidelines 2024
Committee on Tactical Combat Casualty Care (CoTCCC) in 2022-2023.
CAPT Travis Deaton, MD - Chair
CAPT Brendon Drew, DO – Chair (2019-2023)
Mr Harold Montgomery – Vice Chair
CMSgt Shawn Anderson LTC Ryan Knight, MD
CAPT Sean Barbabella, DO CDR Joseph Kotora, MD
HMC Kevin Baskin SrA Oliver Kreuzer
HMCS Joshua Beard CAPT Lanny Littlejohn, MD
SFC Hunter Black CPT John Maitha, PA
HMCM Mark Boyle HMSC John Morey
SGM Curt Conklin MSgt Billie Nored
COL Lance Cordoni, MD Maj D. Marc Northern, MD
CAPT Virginia Damin, RN Mr Keith O’Grady
Col John Dorsch, MD (2022) LtCol Lorenzo Paladino, MD
MAJ Andrew Fisher, MD SFC Justin Rapp
SGM Matthew Garrison MSG Michael Remley
LtCol Brian Gavitt, MD COL Jamie Riesberg, MD
Mr William Gephart, PA, RN HMCM Tyler Scarborough
MAJ Christopher Gonzales, PA Col Stacy Shackelford, MD
COL Kirby Gross, MD CMSgt Travis Shaw
COL Jennifer Gurney, MD CSM Timothy Sprunger
COL Bonnie Hartstein, MD CAPT Matthew Tadlock, MD
CDR Shane Jensen, MD COL Micheal Tarpey, MD
COL Jay Johannigman, MD HMCM Jeremy Torrisi
CDR Joseph Kaleiohi, PA MSG Kaleb Twilligear
Mr Win Kerr MCPO Justin Wilson
CoTCCC Staff
Dr Frank Butler, MD
Ms Danielle Davis
Incoming Members 2024
LTC Michael April, MD LCDR Eric Koch, MD
LTC George Barbee, PA SCPO Richard Neading
HMSC Antonio Boyd HM1 Jonathon Stringer
MSG Cyril Clayton CDR Russell Wier, DO
Mr Michael Eldred
LtCol Christopher Hewitt
HMCM Christopher Huse
MSG Christopher Hutchison\n